
  2006 ICFP Programming Contest Source Release            16 Jul 2007
  Cult of the Bound Variable
  Codename: Homework 7


  This archive contains the source code for the 2006 ICFP Programming
  Contest and the tools we used to make it.

  This source release contains major spoilers for the Codex. The
  contest is entirely self-contained, meaning you can still play it
  without any special resources (other than a computer and compiler)
  by downloading the codex and the Universal Machine specification
  from boundvariable.org. If you haven't done this, we recommend it as
  a much more fun and interactive introduction than reading
  documentation and source code. Stop right now and go get that Codex!

  Another good introduction to the contest is our Technical Report
  (though it also contains spoilers):

    "The Cult of the Bound Variable: The 9th Annual ICFP 
     Programming Contest." Tom Murphy VII, Daniel Spoonhower,
     Chris Casinghino, Daniel R. Licata, Karl Crary,
     Robert Harper. 2006. Technical Report CMU-CS-06-163
    http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/anon/2006/abstracts/06-163.html

  Even if you are still working through the Codex, a few things
  included in the source release may be of interest and are
  more-or-less free of spoilers. The first is our collection of UM
  implementations, which are in the directory um and its various
  subdirectories. Not all are written by experts in the language in
  question. The fastest UM is in the x86-tom directory (assuming you
  have an x86 processor) and the most full-featured is in the um
  directory itself. Most interestingly, the compiler that we used to
  build the contest materials is in um/humlock/. This produces UM
  binaries from an ML-like input language called UML. Most of the rest
  of the contest source code is written in UML. The file
  um/humlock/README explains how to use Humlock. There is also a UM
  assembler in um/whistleock/.

  The directories bureaucracy/ and seeds/ contain "deleted scenes"
  that didn't make it into the final version of the Codex.

  The remainder of the directories contain the source code for various
  parts of the contest. Many have standalone versions that can be
  built from their own directories, but umix/ brings them all
  together. If you want to build the Codex, start in the umix/
  directory.

  Most of the subdirectories contain README files explaining what the
  code does and how to use it. Everything is licensed under the GNU
  GPL (see the file COPYING) except where noted in a README file.

  Enjoy!


  - 2006 Contest Judges

       Tom Murphy VII
       Daniel Spoonhower
       Chris Casinghino
       Daniel R. Licata
       Karl Crary
       Robert Harper
       (see story/STORY_CONTEST_CREDITS for full credits)
